1.22.0 release notes (#67)
canonical/anbox-cloud-docs: reference/release-notes/1.22.0.md

## Introduction

The Anbox Cloud team is pleased to announce the release of Anbox Cloud 1.22.0.

Please see [component versions](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/reference/component-versions) for a list of updated components.

## New features & improvements

The 1.22.0 release of Anbox Cloud brings the following features and improvements:

### Core stack improvements

> * Support for 64-bit only ARM systems.<!--AC-1890, AC-2428-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Support for 64-bit only ARM systems for all supported Android versions.<!--AC-1890, AC-2428-->
```

* Support for installing relevant 32-bit NVIDIA userspace binaries on AMD64 systems.<!--AC-2450-->
* To allow easier identification and use of instances, you can now explicitly name an instance when creating it. See [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--AC-2395-->
* Support for Vulkan 1.3 for Android 13 images.<!--AC-2278-->
* VHAL enhancements:

>     - Configuration returned by the external APIs have a new field containing a name and a list of area names for the standard VHAL properties.<!--AC-2290 and AC-2289-->

Reviewer: What are "external APIs" in this context?

Author: On second thought, "external" is not necessary as we won't be discussing about any other API in release notes. I will remove it.

    - Property values returned by the external APIs have a new field containing a list of area names for the standard VHAL properties.<!--AC-2290-->
    - You can replace the Anbox Cloud VHAL implementation with your custom implementation for AAOS images. See [How to use a custom VHAL implementation](tbd). <!--AC-2371-->

### Streaming stack improvements

> * Streaming can now be enabled when launching an instance using the `--enable-streaming` option. See [How to stream applications](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/application/stream) and [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--Ac-2460 and AC-2360-->

Reviewer 2: Ideally if they apply the new bundle the relation is being formed in it. But for people doing manual upgrades, they would need to relate the charms manually so I think it worth a mention.

> * Streaming can now be enabled when launching an instance using the `--enable-streaming` option. See [How to stream applications](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/application/stream) and [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--Ac-2460 and AC-2360-->

Reviewer: @jat-canonical can you provide some instructions on how to do that?

> * Streaming can now be enabled when launching an instance using the `--enable-streaming` option. See [How to stream applications](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/application/stream) and [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--Ac-2460 and AC-2360-->

Reviewer 2: Covered the instructions [here](https://github.com/canonical/anbox-cloud-docs/pull/70)

* VirGL is the default renderer for NVIDIA GPUs with driver version 545 and later. For driver versions earlier than 545, EmuGL is used as the default renderer. See [Rendering architecture](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/explanation/rendering-architecture).<!--AC-2459, AC-2270 and AC-2348-->

> * Support for [pointer lock](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_Lock_API) is available with this release. This helps in locking the pointer to a particular browser element, for example, your game window, and limits movement outside the game until the lock is disabled. The pointer lock property must be explicitly enabled on the stream object via the [streaming SDK](https://github.com/canonical/anbox-streaming-sdk).<!--AC-2379-->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Experimental support for [pointer lock](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_Lock_API) is available with this release. This helps in locking the pointer to a particular browser element, for example, your game window, and limits movement outside the game until the lock is disabled. The pointer lock property must be explicitly enabled on the stream object via the [streaming SDK](https://github.com/canonical/anbox-streaming-sdk).<!--AC-2379-->
```

### Dashboard improvements

The following improvements are available in the Anbox Cloud dashboard for this release:

* Starting instances with *Error* status from the web dashboard is supported now.<!--LP 2064899-->
* Page level guided tours are now available for help in navigating through the dashboard.
* Support for using custom authentication server instead of Ubuntu SSO.
* Custom instance name field in *Create instance* form.
* Enhancements to VHAL panel.
* Enhancements to forms to support AOSP vs AAOS applications.

### Other

* Support for building custom images of Anbox Cloud based on AAOS. See [Custom images](tbd).<!--AC-2458-->
* Android security updates for May 2024 (see [Android Security Bulletin - May 2024](https://source.android.com/docs/security/bulletin/2024-05-01) for more information).<!--AC-2437-->
* The Android WebView has been updated to [124.0.6367.82](https://chromereleases.googleblog.com/2024/04/chrome-for-android-update_24.html).

## Removed functionality

* Documentation on how to enable VirGL manually is removed because with this release, VirGL is the default renderer for NVIDIA GPUs.

## Known issues

> 

Author: Thanks, I have added these points. 

>  The Anbox Cloud Appliance is being reworked and the current implementation is deprecated. Existing installations of the current implementation are receiving updates until Anbox Cloud 1.24.2. New installations starting with 1.23 will receive the new implementation.

I think it would be good if we give a hint about what the remodel of appliance is about, how it will benefit the users etc. WDYT? If you agree, could you let me know the details?

> 

Reviewer: What about: The new implementation of the appliance will simplify the installation process and reduce overall footprint to allow a more simplified operation in different contexts. In detail the new version will no longer use the Juju charmed operators internally but package all necessary service components directly within the snap.

## Introduction

The Anbox Cloud team is pleased to announce the release of Anbox Cloud 1.22.0.

Please see [component versions](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/reference/component-versions) for a list of updated components.

## New features & improvements

The 1.22.0 release of Anbox Cloud brings the following features and improvements:

### Core stack improvements

> * Support for 64-bit only ARM systems for all supported Android versions.<!--AC-1890, AC-2428-->

Reviewer 3: The `64-bit only` system can refer to `x86_64` arch as well. I'd suggest dropping `ARM` here.

> * Support for installing relevant 32-bit NVIDIA userspace binaries on AMD64 systems.<!--AC-2450-->

Reviewer 3: I am not sure if we want to mention this here as the installation of 32-bit NVIDIA drivers are meant to support the PC gaming(generic image)

Author: cc @morphis Do we want to mention this? FWIW, We have the messaging about custom image (not sure if you mean the same by generic image) for 1.22.0.

Reviewer: We should mention that the 32bit driver binaries are installed as it is visible to the user. Lets not mention generic images here.

Author: so keeping as is.

* To allow easier identification and use of instances, you can now explicitly name an instance when creating it. See [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--AC-2395-->
* Support for Vulkan 1.3 for Android 13 images.<!--AC-2278-->
* VHAL enhancements:

>     - Configuration returned by the APIs have a new field containing a name and a list of area names for the standard VHAL properties.<!--AC-2290 and AC-2289-->

Reviewer 3: @ajanon Correct me, we have had this supported since 1.21.1 release.

Author: It had the 1.22.0 tag on Jira and in any case, we didn't call it out in 1.21.1 release. I see no harm in keeping it. Let me know if you disagree.

Reviewer 3: I don't have a strong opinion on this and let @ajanon and @morphis comment on it.
(For correctness, I'd vote for dropping this and it's been a bug fixing/ small feature of the 1.21.1 release. Meaning we should have documented this in 1.21.1 release note rather than 1.22.0 release note)

Reviewer: If it hasn't mentioned before, lets call this out even if it was fixed in 1.21.2

    - Property values returned by the APIs have a new field containing a list of area names for the standard VHAL properties.<!--AC-2290-->
    - You can replace the Anbox Cloud VHAL implementation with your custom implementation for AAOS images. See [How to use a custom VHAL implementation](tbd). <!--AC-2371-->

### Streaming stack improvements

* Streaming can now be enabled when launching an instance using the `--enable-streaming` option. See [How to stream applications](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/application/stream) and [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--Ac-2460 and AC-2360-->

> * VirGL is the default renderer for NVIDIA GPUs with driver version 545 and later. For driver versions earlier than 545, EmuGL is used as the default renderer. See [Rendering architecture](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/explanation/rendering-architecture).<!--AC-2459, AC-2270 and AC-2348-->

Reviewer 3: For driver versions earlier than 545, EmuGL is used as the default renderer.
->
 For driver versions earlier than 545 or old NVIDIA GPU architecture like Turing, Ampere or Ada, EmuGL is used as the default renderer.

## Introduction

The Anbox Cloud team is pleased to announce the release of Anbox Cloud 1.22.0.

Please see [component versions](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/reference/component-versions) for a list of updated components.

## New features & improvements

The 1.22.0 release of Anbox Cloud brings the following features and improvements:

### Core stack improvements
* Support for 64-bit only systems for all supported Android versions.<!--AC-1890, AC-2428-->
* Support for installing relevant 32-bit NVIDIA userspace binaries on AMD64 systems.<!--AC-2450-->
* To allow easier identification and use of instances, you can now explicitly name an instance when creating it. See [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--AC-2395-->

> * Support for Vulkan 1.3 for Android 13 images.<!--AC-2278-->

Reviewer 3: @keirthana just another headup, the support for Vulkan 1.3 to Android 13 images is not there yet for 1.22.0 due to a bug we found. The [fix](https://code.launchpad.net/~morphis/indore/+git/mesa/+merge/465849) won't be included in 1.22.0 release but 1.22.1 release as discussed with @morphis

Author: Thanks Gary, I will remove this for 1.22.0.

* VHAL enhancements:
    - Configuration returned by the APIs have a new field containing a name and a list of area names for the standard VHAL properties.<!--AC-2290 and AC-2289-->
    - Property values returned by the APIs have a new field containing a list of area names for the standard VHAL properties.<!--AC-2290-->
    - You can replace the Anbox Cloud VHAL implementation with your custom implementation for AAOS images. See [How to use a custom VHAL implementation](tbd). <!--AC-2371-->

### Streaming stack improvements

> * Streaming can now be enabled when launching an instance using the `--enable-streaming` option. See [How to stream applications](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/application/stream) and [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create).<!--Ac-2460 and AC-2360-->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Streaming can now be enabled when launching an instance using the `--enable-streaming` option. This enablement of this feature requires the charm deployment for anbox cloud to be upgraded first. See [How to upgrade anbox cloud](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/update/upgrade-anbox), [How to stream applications](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/application/stream) and [How to create an instance](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/instance/create). <!--Ac-2460 and AC-2360-->
```

* User experience enhancements to the AAOS control panel:
  - Extending VHAL support to allow setting the geographic location and to be able to provide and revoke consent for enabling APIs in the browser when using maps.
* Enhancements to forms to support AOSP vs AAOS applications.

### Other

* Support for building custom images of Anbox Cloud based on AAOS. See [Custom images](tbd).<!--AC-2458-->
* Android security updates for May 2024 (see [Android Security Bulletin - May 2024](https://source.android.com/docs/security/bulletin/2024-05-01) for more information).<!--AC-2437-->
* The Android WebView has been updated to [124.0.6367.82](https://chromereleases.googleblog.com/2024/04/chrome-for-android-update_24.html).

## Deprecations

See [Deprecation notices](tbd) for a list of deprecations in this release.

## Removed functionality

* Documentation on how to enable VirGL manually is removed because with this release, VirGL is the default renderer for NVIDIA GPUs.

## Known issues

The following known issues exist in the 1.22.0 release and are planned to be fixed in future releases:

* Video playback does not work on 64-bit only systems where the NVIDIA GPU is installed.

> * For existing charmed deployments, creating instances with streaming enabled using the `enable-streaming` option requires manually adding the new relation between the AMS and the stream agent charms. See [How to upgrade Anbox Cloud](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/update/upgrade-anbox).

Reviewer: @keirthana we found one more issue today which we need to record here. Can you add the following:

* Due to a bug in LXD (see [#13420](https://github.com/canonical/lxd/issues/13420) a manual workaround need to applied to every LXD node deployed via the [Anbox Cloud LXD charm](https://charmhub.io/ams-lxd) as otherwise instances launched via AMS will fail with an error similar to the following one `Error: Failed creating instance from image: Failed to run: zfs set volsize=3000000512 ams0/containers/ams-cp1pjd7lra53mbq42mug: exit status 255 (cannot set property for 'ams0/containers/ams-cp1pjd7lra53mbq42mug': 'volsize' must be a multiple of volume block size (16K))`. Once a new unit of the charm has been deployed run `juju ssh lxd/n -- lxc storage set ams0 volume.zfs.block_mode=false`.

Reviewer: @jat-canonical @adglkh @ajanon ^^

Author: Done

### Dashboard improvements

The following improvements are available in the Anbox Cloud dashboard for this release:

* Page level guided tours are now available for help in navigating through the dashboard.
* Support for using custom authentication server instead of Ubuntu SSO.
* Custom instance name field in *Create instance* form.
* User experience enhancements to the AAOS control panel:
  - Extending VHAL support to allow setting the geographic location and to be able to provide and revoke consent for enabling APIs in the browser when using maps.
* Enhancements to forms to support AOSP vs AAOS applications.

### Other

* Support for building custom images of Anbox Cloud based on AAOS. See [Custom images](tbd).<!--AC-2458-->
* Android security updates for May 2024 (see [Android Security Bulletin - May 2024](https://source.android.com/docs/security/bulletin/2024-05-01) for more information).<!--AC-2437-->
* The Android WebView has been updated to [124.0.6367.82](https://chromereleases.googleblog.com/2024/04/chrome-for-android-update_24.html).

## Deprecations

> * Support for Ubuntu 20.04 (focal) will be dropped in a future release.
> * Support for the EmuGL renderer is removed in Anbox Cloud 1.23.0.

Reviewer 4: I think we should be a tad more nuanced here. We are planning to remove these in the future, but this can change depending on various circumstances.
What about:
```suggestion
* Support for Ubuntu 20.04 (focal) is planned for removal in a future release.
* Support for the EmuGL renderer is planned for removal in Anbox Cloud 1.23.0.
```
Also, I think it would be good if we could tell in what release we plan to remove focal support.
IIRC we talked about removing support for focal in 1.23 or 1.24. cc @adglkh @morphis Do you recall what we had planned for this?

Reviewer 3: @ajanon I'll leave Simon comment on this.

* The Anbox Cloud Appliance is being reworked and the current implementation is deprecated. Existing installations of the current implementation will receive updates until Anbox Cloud 1.24.2. Starting from 1.23.0, new installations will receive the new implementation of the appliance.

  The new implementation of the appliance will no longer use the Juju charmed operators internally but package all necessary service components directly within the snap. This helps to simplify the installation process and reduce overall footprint.

## Removed functionality

* Documentation on how to enable VirGL manually is removed because with this release, VirGL is the default renderer for NVIDIA GPUs.

## Known issues

The following known issues exist in the 1.22.0 release and are planned to be fixed in future releases:

* Video playback does not work on 64-bit only systems where the NVIDIA GPU is installed.

> * Creating instances with streaming enabled using the `enable-streaming` option requires manually adding the new relation between the AMS and the stream agent charms. See [How to upgrade Anbox Cloud](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/update/upgrade-anbox).

Reviewer 3: Routing people to [How to upgrade Anbox Cloud](https://anbox-cloud.io/docs/howto/update/upgrade-anbox) where generally how to upgrade *regular* deployment by adding the relation between ams and stream-agent doesn't fit well for the appliance. This issue is anbox cloud *appliance* specific, and the relation must be established automatically when upgrading the Anbox Cloud appliance to 1.22.0(while it's not the case for regular deployment where manual setup is always required in such a case).
Hence, I think we need to call out here that for the **appliance**, people need to manually add the relation between ams and stream agent to work around the known issue. @jat-canonical could you please put a small guide here in the release notes please.
Thanks

## Deprecations

* Support for Ubuntu 20.04 (focal) will be dropped in a future release.
* Support for the EmuGL renderer is removed in Anbox Cloud 1.23.0.
* The Anbox Cloud Appliance is being reworked and the current implementation is deprecated. Existing installations of the current implementation will receive updates until Anbox Cloud 1.24.2. Starting from 1.23.0, new installations will receive the new implementation of the appliance.

  The new implementation of the appliance will no longer use the Juju charmed operators internally but package all necessary service components directly within the snap. This helps to simplify the installation process and reduce overall footprint.

## Removed functionality

* Documentation on how to enable VirGL manually is removed because with this release, VirGL is the default renderer for NVIDIA GPUs.

## Known issues

The following known issues exist in the 1.22.0 release and are planned to be fixed in future releases:

* Video playback does not work on 64-bit only systems where the NVIDIA GPU is installed.

> * Creating instances with streaming enabled using the `enable-streaming` option is not available for the Anbox Cloud Appliance.

Author: Ah I thought that was just for existing installations of regular deployments. Thanks, have corrected it now.
